Thank you Sean.
I was about to forget
about recording.
So.
Continuing on the topics we
started last week about the
combination of logic, we said
that combination logic is just a
combination of the logic gates
without any feedback.
We said that at any time, the
main property of the combination
of logic, that is that at
anytime, if you provide the
value for the input variables.
Uh, with some propagation delay
you can have the value for the
output. Binary valuables in this
course we can assume that by
default the propagation delay is
0. Until I mean the problem
states that there is a delay.
We saw an instance of delay
in the four bit adder with
the carry propagation.
And then we continued with the
category of the combination of
logic we are. We said that we
want to build a computer system.
So some logic units or logic
circuits are very essential.
We put them into three
main categories, those
for arithmetic, those
for data transmission
and those for coding.
But the arithmetic we covered
the binary addition,
subtraction, multiplication,
and comparator. So basically
any essential operator for
doing arithmetic. We didn't
cover the division you can
think about that, but later in
the sequential logic we may
have time to introduce the
binary division for this
category.
Today we're going to move on to
the second category about the
data transmission. The logic
circuits for this category is
just very useful for
transmitting data from memory
to CPU or vice versa, and later
I mean next week we're going to
move on to the third category
about the coding.
So let's start with the second
category data transmission and
start with the decoders.
All when we say decoder. By
default we mean binary decoder.
So whenever you see just decoder
it means that binary decoder
because in the logic circuits we
have BCD decoders will introduce
it next week.
Also we have a display decoders
or seven segment decoders. This
is one of the questions in the
book for the Chapter 3, so you
can have a look at that if you
have time we can discuss this.
So if you see just decoder it
means binary decoder
otherwise it is BCD decoder,
display decoder or other type of
decoders. So we're going to
introduce the binary decoders.
binary decoders is a logic
circuit that Maps a binary
number. Or we can say that
binary address in in form of the
binary number to 1 hot vector.
But what is 1 hot vector? One
hot vector is a stream of
binary values zero and one.
But with this limitation, only
one spot is 1. All the other
spots are zero.
So basically, in the first 2
examples are one hot vector
in that just one cells is
hot, all the other cells are
cold or low voltage.
Other the third example here
because two spot is 1
is not an instance of one
hot vector.
So let's see what's the use of
this logic circuit. I mean why
we have to decode a binary
number to 1 hot vector?
So as you may know, in computer
system all the processing is
happening in the CPU or central
processing unit. You are
going to build it by the
logic circuit in this course.
Also, we have another unit
called memory and all the
information as well. I mean for
instance the codes, the
programs, data, etc all must
reside in the memory.
And any processing must be all
the data must be transferred to
the CPU for processing, and the
result must be transferred to
the memory to just show the output.
So basically there is a
communication between central
processing unit and memory unit.
At each time, the CPU must
specify what location of the
memory we have to look at see and
transfer the content of that
memory location. So the CPU
does that with an address or
a binary number to select one
of the memory location at
anytime. So basically you can
see that the memory location
has a vector and at each time
just select one of them.
for instance here the second memory
unit, and then the third memory
unit up up until the end. I
mean, and memory unit. So at
each time we need to just select
one memory unit here and all the
other memory units must not be
selected, so. All are zero.
So here the CPU must specify
which memory location to be
enabled. So this is the decoder.
This is the task or the logic of
the decoder. So the simplest
decoder is this.
If you are given 2 spots and
we want to select just one of
these spots at anytime, so for
selecting among two combination,
we need just one bit.
So if it is zero, we select the
first spot. And the other spot
is zero. And if it is one, we
select the second spot and the
other I mean the first spot is 0
so as we already knew by one
binary variable, or one bit, we
can create two combinations 2 to
the power of 1 which is 2.
So basically this is the most
simplest decoder, one within the
input and two outputs based on
the value of the.
Input we want to select
one of the outputs.
So if you're gonna design is
a logic circuit with one
input variable and two output
variables. So we need a
truth table.
Uh, with this is called a
decoder. One input 2 to the
power of one or two outputs, or
1 two decoder.
So one input variable and two
outputs whenever X is zero, we
makes D0 1 and D1 0 just one of
them is 1 and the other is 0
whenever X is 1 means that
selecting the second output and.
Putting the zero in first.
So as you can see here, at
anytime, only one spot in the
outputs becomes one.
And if you just.
As in the designs that we
already have it, so you have to
see what entries makes the output
one and then write it as a sum
of minterms or right. Look at
those entries. That makes it 0
and write it as a product of
sum. But if you write it as a
sum of minterms. D0 only makes
make comes one when the X is 0,
D0 is equal to minterm 0
. And D1 makes becomes
one whenever we have X1, so D1
is equal to minterm one.
So just normal Boolean
function as a sum of
minterms for those minterms.
That makes the output one.
So the interesting or the nice
property of the decoder is that
output is exactly equal to the
minterm, and so the output for
D0 is midterm 0.
Output for D1 is minterm one.
And here's the design, so X.
If it is 0 not it becomes one,
so D0 becomes one and the
one is zero. An IF X is a
one. That's becomes a
0, so D0 becomes
zero and D1 becomes one.
Just selecting it in two spots
by just one not gate.
So let's expand the decoder and
now the task is selecting one of
the outputs between 4 spots.
So we have four outputs at
anytime. One of them is going to
be select and become one, all
the others becomes 0.
So for selecting between 4
spots, four is 2 to the power of
2, so we need to it's so it
becomes a decoder 2 by 4.
So we need 2 bits and based on
the variation of inputs. If it
is 00 enabled, the 1st.
output and all the other outputs are 0.
If it is 01.
Meaning that the binary number 01
select the second spot.
And all the other spots
are zero.
10 meaning with binary value 2.
We make the this, uh, the
third output or two one and
all the other outputs are zero and
Lastly both the inputs are
one. We make the last output
one and all the other output
0.
So you can see that at anytime
we have one hot vector in the
output and based on the binary
number, so this binary number in
the decoders can be said. This
is a binary address. So for the
address 1 one this I mean
location is selected and all the
other location is not selected.
So if you are going to design
this, this is a logic circuit
with two input variables and
four output variables. So if we.
From the truth table two input
variables. Four variables.
And we have to see when the
output variables becomes one.
But the D0, whenever the input
is 0 0, becomes one and all the
other cases is a D0 is 0.
But the D1 only when the input
is 0 1 becomes one and all the
other cases become zero and etc.
Again for the D3.
Only if the inputs are 1 1,
meaning that the binary
number binary addresses 3 D3,
becomes one. All the
other outputs are 0.
So and then we design the logic
circuit for each of the outputs.
And here is the design. So X
x' Y. Y bar?
E 0 is equal to x'
Y' so xbar.
Y bar
and with each other.
And the same for the other outputs.
So you can see that the decoders
or actually voice or the logic
circuit that. Creates minterms.
So D3 is XY to minterm 3 D2
is Minterm two, D1 is
minterm one. So whenever we need
to produce the minterm we can
reuse the decoders.
for the next decoder. We can have
the decoder three by 2 to the
power three or three by 8.
So this is the table from the
book. So for the decoder with
three input we can select from
among the 8 outputs at each time
one of them. So whenever this is
the input address is 000 is
select, the first output D0
and all the other outputs are.
0.
Whenever the input is the binary
number one, we select D1 and all
the other outputs are zero.
Up until here, whenever the
input address or the number is
7, he just selected D7 and all
the other outputs are zero, and
then we just designed the logic
circuit for each of the outputs
for D0 D1 D2. Up until D7.
And the design is in the book in
the for the Figure 4.19.
And again, as you can see here,
this is exactly as producing the
minterms. So the D0 is
X'. y Bar Z bar,
which is the term 0?
for instance D 6 is the minterm 6,
which is XYZ Bar 110.
we can build a higher
decoders for instance 4.
By two to the power of 4 or 16
coders or decoder. 4 by 16.
Decoder 5 by 32. Decoder an etc.
So in general.
You can have a decoder,
n input and two to the
power of  n output so n by
two to the power of n.
Any questions so far?
No questions.
So an interesting problem with
designing the decoder is that is
it possible to reuse a smaller
decoders to build the larger
decoders? This is the
interesting problem. All the
logic circuits, for instance, as
I said, reusing smaller units
for building larger units.
So for instance, if you are
going to design the two by four
decoder and we already bought
the one by two decoders from
the market and we attach them
in a way to design the two by
four decoders.
Answer is yes, and The thing is
this is very easy to think about
that 'cause. The decoder 2 by 4
has two inputs and four outputs
to. If you have one by two
decoders. So you can, you could
say that so I can have two, one
by two decoders.
The first decoder actually is
responsible for the first 2.
Spots the second decoder is
responsible for the 2nd two
spots to in general in. In total
you have four outputs.
And then the . The
important part is that the two
input bits goes in what way the
decoders? So you could say
that the first bit goes to the
first decoder and the second
bit goes to the second.
Unfortunately, if you tried this
design to get the two by four
decoder. It doesn't work, and
the reason is this.
If you input a 0 0.
So zero goes to the first
decoder and the first decoder
based on the value of 0 enables
the the zero output.
Yes.
Also, this zero in the second
both the second decoder and
makes the DO of the second
decoder one. So in the output you
don't have one hot vector.
Actually two spots are one and
this is not correct.
As another instance here, if you
input 01, so the first decoder
selects the D1 and the second
decoder selects the D2. I mean
the first output of itself, D0,
which is. D2 of the
final decoder 2 by 4 decoder
again in the output. You don't
have one hot vector.
Though. What is the solution?
Any of you can mean propose a
solution for this.
How can we solve this?
To make the one hot in the re
using the one by two decoders.
Marco says connect first decoder
to 2nd decoder.
How come because this?
The one thing is how this is
possible? Because the second,
because it has only one input.
And the first decoder has two
outputs. So if you wanted to
connect the first with the
second one, it's not possible.
The thing is, how do you connect
two output to one input, so you
have to come up with the logic
circuit with the D0 and D1
connected to this one, and
another thing is that.
If you connect the first decoder
with the second one, finally you
have two outputs. But we are
going to build a decoder
that has four outputs.
Solution is this.
Building a decoder that has a
has an enable input but
enabled, meaning that we want
to build the decoder that we
can make it. We turn it on,
meaning that working properly
as as we expect that, or we
can turn off decoder and as a
result all the outputs of the
decoder becomes 0, meaning
that the decoder is turned
off.
So let's see what we mean
by decoder. With additional
enable input.
So here is the design. I'm
saying that you already have one
by two decoder with one bit in
the input and two in the output.
But I wanna add add additional
input just to say that I'm going
to turn it on or turn it off if
it is turning on. This worked
like before, but if it is turned off
all the outputs regardless of
the input going.
0 meaning that decoder is off.
So if you are going to design
this, we have two inputs.
And two outputs. So this
is a new decoder expanded
the code. I mean kind of
new version of the decoder
with additional enabling.
So if you go so again as an
example, if is is 0.
Uh, all the outputs are zero,
meaning that decoder is turned
off regardless of the binary
number in the input.
However, if it is enabled, it
means that it's turned on and
based on the input value we
select one of the outputs.
So the truth is, we're going to
have two variables in the input,
E an X.
And still you have two
outputs for the decoder,
one to an if E is 0.
Regardless of the value of
X, the output is always 0.
for D0 and D1.
Again, here in this store he is
zero, X is 1, but because it is
turned off the other for both
outputs are zero. However,
if it is enabled.
This on the X we can output the
0 1 and D1 0 or if X is 1 D0 is zero
and D one is one so whenever it is
enabled, there's a one hot
vector. Whenever it is not
enabled, there is all.
The vectors of the
output are zero.
The problem with this truth
table is that we lose the nice
property of the decoder, so.
Without the enabled, DO was
equal to minterm 0, D1 was
equal to minterm 1 by
introducing additional input. D0
is equal to min term 2.
As you can see here. Because in
the minterm 2, D0 becomes
one and D one becomes equal to
minterm 3, because when the
input is the minterm3 D1
gonna be 1.
But this is not I mean OK. I
mean, this is not a nice
property so that the the
property that the EI in the
decoders is equal to the mid
term I is very good. We want
to keep it so.
We can still assume that we have
the normal decoder without any
enabled. And just.
And the final output of a normal
decoder with. Enabling
so basically we have the
normal decoder.
At the end, for the output of
the normal decoder, we make an
another and with the enable
input. If he is 0, all these
ants become zero, so it's kind
of diffusing all the outputs for
the normal decoder. If it is 1.
You have one in the and,
so it means that the and
look at the other inputs.
Which is the normal decoder?
So basically this is the normal
decoder without enabled and we
just with the normal truth
table, so the output D0 is
means minterm zero. D1 is
minterm one. But for the enabled
input, just. Create an
and with all the parts
of the normal decoder.
whenever E is once working fine,
whenever E is 0 all the output is
zero regardless of out of the
normal decoder.
So this is called a
decoder with enabled input.
So basically with enabled input
we just add an and with output
of the decoder.
So now we have a decoder with
enable input. So with this
design you can now build the two
by four decoder by reusing one
by two decoders.
So here, basically a here's
the design. So we we are
given 2 bits in the input. So
we attach the lowest
significant bit both
decoders.
As you can see here.
And then attach the highest
significant bit to the enabled
input of the decoders.
So as you can see here, based on
the value of Y.
We can enable one decoder.
Or select one decoder
and deselect or turn
off the other decoder.
So let's see this in their
example. So imagine the the
Y is 0 not one, so
the first decoder?
Is active now.
And zero goes here. The second
decoder is not active.
But when it's not active always the
output. Gonna be 0.
So this the 2nd two spots are
always 0. And the first two spot
depends only on the 1st decoder,
which is depending on the value
of X, if X is 0, first spot
becomes one. And the second spot
0. So the first spot is 1
zero. The second to the
spot is already 0 because
the decoder is turned off.
An IF X is 1.
Second, spot of the
first decoder becomes one.
And the first spot becomes
zero so an almost the 2nd
spot for second decoder
is always 0.
However, if the Y is 1.
First, decoder is not active.
And the second decoder is
active. So always the first to
spot are going to be 0 and based
on the value of X. Now the
output of the second decoder
going to be 1.
or 0 So if X is zero, a second
decoder is active.
Thought EO of the second,
because it becomes one which is
the D2 of the  The two by
four decoder. And if X is 1.
Uh, again the first decoder is
attend off always 0 second
decoders active. An X is one, B1
becomes one which is equal to
the D3 in the larger decoder.
So as you can see here, based on
this design. By turn off and on
the decoders you can have the
one hot vector in the output.
And this can be a.
2 by 4 decoder. By reusing the
one by two decoders.
So I have some questions in the
chat box. How come that isn't a
problem for and?
Input 01
so let's go to the this
one this.
Nicole.
He was about to explain
how it works.
So is there any questions?
No questions.
Nonika you gotta answer yes.
No problem, so let's continue.
One thing is that if you see.
This selection between the
decoders so basically as you
already knew, whenever we wanted
to select memory spot, we use
the decoders. So you can think
of decoders for any selection
tasks, so whenever you are asked
to select one item among n
item, so only one of them, so
it's kind of applying designing
the decoder because the decoder
only selects one output and all
the other outputs are zero.
So again, whenever you see a
selection task, just one item
among an item.
Hence you that you have to use
some kind of decoder.
for instance here for the decoder 2
by 4. You have to select one of
the decoders, one by two
decoders. Either the first one
or the second one. So we are
selecting one of them.
As you can see here the Y bit,
either select the first one or
the select is second one.
So this is another decoder, so
we can simply add another
decoder one by two.
By two outputs.
And then we just input the Y
the input of this new decoder.
If Y is 1, E 0 becomes
if Y is 0 D0, becomes active first
decoder. If Y is 1 D1
of this decoder becomes one.
So the second decoder becomes
active. And for this decoder, we
just put one meaning that this
decoder must be always active.
So here you only use the
decoders to design the.
The two by four decoder.
So here is another example.
So for instance here.
X is zero and one is 1.
So X goes to both decoders.
Based on the why we selected
decoder, so one goes to the
first decoder, this one in order
to select among these two
decoders. So because X is one,
D1 becomes. One so the second
decoder becomes Active, E 0
becomes 0, so the first decoder
is turned off, so the output is
always 0. And the second
decoder, which is active now,
size based on the value of X X is
0, so D0 becomes one.
And D1 becomes 0.
So this way we have one hot
vector. 10 This is the
same behavior as the
normal 2 by 4 decoder.
You can try different example of
this design as one one or one 0
or 0, zero and etc.
So the next question is that so
now we can redesign 2 by 4
decoder by reusing one by two
decoders. So is it possible to
reuse the two by four decoders
to build 3 by 8 decoders?
The three by eight decoder,
three input. 8 outputs so in
order to produce 8 outputs by
two by four decoders. You have
to use 2 ,2 by 4 decoders in order
to create 8 outputs.
And, uh. This is the design
so 2, 2 by 4 decoders.
Each of them has a four outputs.
In total we have 8 outputs.
And the highest
significant bit. Select which
decoder is going to be active.
And all other lower
significant bits attached to
both decoder, so X&Y goes to
the first decoder and also
goes to the second decoder.
So X&Y, the lower significant
bits goes to all the other
decoders. However, the
highest significant bit
select switch decoder going
to be active at anytime.
Ah.
Nicholas asked a question that
decoder acts like or gate.
Ah no, because The thing is or.
for instance if you have one thing is
that for the OR gate you always
have one output.
Decoder, for instance, if you
have two inputs for the OR gate,
you have one output. If you have
three input in the OR gate, you
have one output but. For the
decoder it based on the n out
n input put to the power of N
output, so that behavior is not
similar to the OR gate.
And also as you, as you saw in
the design of the decoder.
I haven't used or always the the
main gate in the decoder. Let's
come back here. Here, the main gate
in the decoder is the AND.
Meaning that only based on minterms because
we are going to generate the
minterms in terms of the AND
within the binary variables.
Did I answer your
question, Nicholas?
OK, so here is another, this is just
an example. For instance here.
If we input 110 for the three by
eight decoder. So the highest
significant bit goes to the selected
decoders. Sp it is 1, so it goes
here and D1 becomes one
which selects the second
decoder. And the D0 is 0, so
it means that the first decoder
is turned off.
And the two other bits
connect both
decoders, 10. 10 goes
here, but this decoder
is turned off. There's always
zero in there.
So it doesn't matter what is XY
However, the same
XY goes here. This is
active. So 01. 01 is the
binary address or binary
number 2, so it enables D2.
And then all the other aspects
are 0. D2 of the second
decoder is equal to the D6 of
the overall decoder, 3 by 8.
And this is the new decoder.
Just by using 1 one by two
decoder to select which
D is going to be active.
And two 2 by 4 decoders to
generate the outputs.
So you can think of this
question. Is it possible to
design 4 by 16 decoder by
reusing smaller decoders?
Using three by 8 quarters only?
2 by 4 decoders only or a
mixture of them?
Or can I design the 4
by 16 decoder only using the one
by two decoder? The answer is yes. For
the this one, 3 by 8.
Ah. You have to use two 3 by 8's
in order to create 16 outputs.
But the thing is, in order to
select one of the three by eight
decoders, you have to
Use one by two decoders, so
it's not possible to just use
the 3 by 8 decoder. You need
another decoder:
One by two decoder. So this is
kind of interesting.
The Ppoblem with the redesign,
larger decoders needs smaller
decoders.
If you look in the market, you
can simply buy it. This is the IC
for 3 by 8 decoder.
And this is the price,
where is the price?
Ah oh here.
Here is the price.
But, uh, please go to this link.
This is a data sheet. I already
opened the data sheet for what
you can see in the.
Uh. Market when you go to
buy a decoder. So this is the IC,
each pin off the IC is
described in this data sheet
says that the the output of the
decoder is Y0 up until Y6 and
this is Y7.
It's just equal to D0, D1 up until
D7 for our 3 by 8
decoders. This is the ground.
A B C are the input of the decoder
and this is the ground and I'm
not sure what are these two
pins. And. Here is the logic
symbol for that. This is the
enable input. Oh yes, so the
enable input are these three, the AND
of these. So this is the decoder
with enable input.
So just for your information,
for the code, this is not
important. This is important
for computer engineers who
want to actually build the
logic circuits.
So for instance, if you want to
build the 4 by 16 decoder,
you have to buy two of
these IC's and one of the one by
two decoder IC to rebuild the
4 by 16 decoder.
Just for your interest,
I just put that here.
And another nice property of the
decoder is that because
decoders creates the minterms
in the output,
We can design the Boolean
functions either in the form of
sum of minterms or product of
the Maxterms by using the
decoders, and this is very
interesting, I mean.
So imagine you are given a
Boolean function as a sum
of minterms 2, 4, 7.
We already knew that by Decoder 3
by 8, you can create or you can
put a minterm from 0 up
until minterm 7 because at
anytime based on the inputs, for
instance if it is 000, the output
for minterm 0 is
gonna be 1, and all the other minterm outputs
are gonna be 0, so the decoder is
kind of acting to produce
the minterms based on the value
of the inputs.
So for this function, we say that
it is going to be one
whenever the minterm 2 is in the
input, minterm 4 is in the input
or minterm 7 is in the
input. So in other words, if
the value of the inputs are 010,
2 for minterm 2, D2 becomes one.
All the other outputs are zero.
If the value of the input is 4
meaning it is 100 (001 is a MISTAKE!),
D4 becomes one and all the other
outputs are zero.
And whenever we have the seven
in the input, 111,
D7 becomes one so
if we OR the output, D2, D4 and D7,
it is exactly as the
Boolean function, this one.
Sigma minterms 2, 4, 7.
So this is a general idea for the
design of any Boolean function if
they are using sum of minterms by
using the decoders.
Also, you can use the decoders
for designing the logic
circuit based on the product of
the Maxterms. Maxterms were those
terms that output 0.
And also Maxterm I is equal to
minterm I followed by the not, we
already covered this. So here
the Boolean function is maxterms
0,1,3,5,6. Meaning that if we see
these values in the input, the Maxterms
or the entries for the
Boolean function becomes 0.
So for instance, if
You have the zero in the input.
D0 becomes one which is the
minterm, and we have to apply
another not on top of that, so it
becomes 0. So D0 not.
And then maxterm one.
Minterm 1 and not.
Maxterm 3: minterm 3 not, and
etc., followed by
a final AND.
This is the AND so.
Minterm I not becomes maxterm and
then this is the product
of sum, so you can design any
Boolean function in terms of
product of maxterms based on
decoders like this.
But each maxterm you see, you just
select that minterm in the
decoder and apply and not on top
of that.
Followed by the AND.
For instance, if you are
going to redesign full adder
using the decoder, we already
designed the full adder using
logic circuits. Also by using one half
adder, also by using two half adders
and one OR gate.
So now we want to redesign the
full adder using decoders.
So the sum in the full adder is
equal to minterms 1,2,4,7 and the carry
is minterms 3,5,6,7. Sum is
exclusive or of the XY and the
carry from the previous step.
And the carry is XY OR X
AND with the carrier from
the previous step. Or Y
AND with the carry with
the previous step.
And this was the truth table for
that. So for the full adder,
given XY and the carry from the
previous step, this is the
carry. And this is the sum. We
already said that two
lectures ago. So now we want
to redesign carry and sum
based on the decoders. So
basically in the decoder,
what decoder do we need? We
need a decoder 3 by 8. Three
inputs by 8 outputs.
The minterms 3, 5, 6, 7 for the carry.
Minterms 1, 2,
4 and 7 for the sum.
And here is the design for the
full adder using a decoder.
1 2 4 7 for the
sum.
And for the carry 3 5 6 7.
One thing is that normally if
the decoder doesn't show the
order of the bits, the order is
as we said here, X Y Z. So Z is
the highest significant bit. And X
is the lowest significant bit.
However, if you reorder
the inputs, for instance in the
book, you have to specify the
significance of the bit, the
significant of the bit. For
instance, in the book, the decoder
uses the reverse order of
the significance, so that's why
it specifies the significance.
This is the lowest
significant bit and this is
the highest significant bit.
Any questions so far?
So basically, decoders are
generally for the task of
selection, one item among N
items. And we can reuse the
orders for writing the Boolean
function using the sum of
minterms, because it acts like
enabling one minterm at a time in the output.
But also we can reuse decoders
for writing Boolean functions based
on the product of the maxterms.
Basically, for those maxterms,
we just select the minterms
in the output of the decoder
and apply the not so it
becomes maxterm.
Ah, if there's no question
we can continue with the
next topic: logic
circuit encoders.
Encoder, as the name implies,
it's the reversed logic of the
decoder. Decoder wants to decode
a binary number to 1-hot vector
for the task of selection.
Encoder actually does the
reverse. It receives a 1-hot
vector and it includes the 1-hot
vector to the binary address
or binary number.
So for the encoder, 1-hot vector is in the
input and a binary number or binary
address is in the output.
So for instance, for the
decoder, one by two.
If you just input the output of
the decoder to the encoder, the
encoder is 2 by 1.
So there's the logic. So let's see how
can we design the encoder.
So for the encoder 2 by 1, two
is 2 to the power of 1 * 1,
meaning that by 1-hot vector of
2 elements, we can encode
the 1-hot
to one single bit X.
So the design, we have
two inputs, D0 D1, and we
have one output F1.
So if D0 is 1 and D1 is 0,
this is the 1-hot vector.
So we say that the binary number
is 0. Again, if you think of
the decoder, if you input
the zero, it makes 01 in the
output. For the encoder, it's the reverse.
If you input 01, the output, the
binary number is 0.
Also for this output, if you
input the 1-hot 1 0, it
creates the binary number
one.
However, there are two instances
in the input for this logic
design that doesn't have any
meaning for task of encoding. If
both are zero, it's not 1-hot
anymore. Also, if both are one, this is
not 1-hot vector anymore. For
these two cases, the output of
the encoder is not determined,
so it's not valid.
We already saw and we already said that
sometimes
in practice, the value of the
Boolean function in the output
is not valid or we cannot rely
on the value. This is another
instance, and we said this is
called don't care conditions.
We simply just don't care about
the result in the output
function, we just care about those
output that have the 1-hot in the input.
For those with without any
1-hot, we just simply ignore
that. But we said that the
don't care conditions
actually helps us to
minimize the Boolean
function. So right now if
you are going to write a
Boolean function for F1,
the only time they are F1
becomes one is the minterm
10, minterm 2. But we can reuse
these don't care
conditions to minimize F1 a
little bit more.
So if you put it in the
Karnaugh map with two variables,
these are the cells in the
Karnaugh map with two variables, so
the only minterms that is one is minterm
2. Minterm 1 is zero and the
other two cells are don't care.
So if I'm going to write the F1,
include the shared region
with this don't care so it
becomes D0 not.
Or we can use shared region, so
F1 becomes D1.
So the only benefit of the don't
care condition is just to, uh,
do more minimizations.
But the thing is, so now we have
designed the encoder.
Two inputs, one output. But the
thing is, in practice, you have
to make sure that whenever you
see the output, that output is a
valid one. For instance, if you look
at the value here and if the
value is zero, you have to make
sure that this zero is not the
correct 0, because the input is
00, the input was not right.
So in practice for the encoder,
we add another output called valid
or V. The value of the valid
just determines if the value of
F1 is valid to look at or not.
So whenever we have 1-hot in
the input, the valid is 1. Whenever
we don't have any 1-hot in the
input, it means that the value
value in the F1 is not a valid
value, so V is 0.
And if we write the Boolean
function for V, V is the minterm.
As you can see here minterm
0 and minterm
2. So, if you put it in
the Karnaugh map, it becomes the
diagonal cell which is not
adjacent, so we said that
whenever you see the
diagonal cell, which is a
hint that this is an
exclusive or. So, as you can
see, D0 or D1 bar, and
D0 bar or D1, so
this is exclusive or between
D0 and D1.
This is the encoder 2 by 1.
So two inputs.
One output F1 and one output for the
validity of that.
Whenever valid is one, we just
then look at F1.
If V is 0, meaning
that the inputs are not
1-hot vector, it means F1 is not valid.
For the
larger encoder after two by one,
we can have two to the power of
two by two, so it becomes four
by two. So if you receive a 1-hot
vector with four elements, we
can encode it to the binary
number with two bits.
And you need a valid output just to
say that the inputs were valid.
Then you have to look at the
outputs. So decoder 2 by 4,
encoder 4 by 2.
So for the encoder four by two,
you have four variables in the
input, two variables in the
output, plus one additional
output V. And this is the truth
table for that. So four
input variables, D0 up
until D3.
Two outputs X&Y, F1, F2 and one
additional output F3 as a valid.
If all are zero, this is not the
1-hot vector, so the valid is
0 and we don't look at the X&Y.
The 2nd row. This is the 1-hot
vector. D0 is 1 and all the
other inputs are zero, so.
This means that we can encode
this 1-hot vector to minterm 0.
Minterm 0 is 00.
And this is valid.
The 2nd row. This is a 1-hot
vector, so D1 is 1, so we
generate the minterm 1. Minterm one is 01
and this is valid.
The 4th row. This is not a
1-hot vector, so this is not
valid and we shouldn't look at
the output, and etc.
So. Then we have to design the
Boolean function for F1. Let's
see which entries makes it one
and write it as a sum of
minterms and we can reuse the
don't care condition for
minimization. The same for F2.
Sum of minterms.
And then reuse the don't care
conditions for minimization. The
same for the valid. We have
four input variables, so we can
minimize using the four variable
Karnaugh map. For the F1,
by reusing the don't
care conditions, we can
create two large regions,
so F1 becomes D1 or D3.
This is the one so we can create
the adjusting cells here. So in
this region, the only thing that matters
is the value of D1.
D0 is either zero or one and
D2 and D3 are either zero or one.
In this region,
The only thing that matters is the
value of D1.
It's always 1.
F2 the same, so for F2, the
minterm four is 1. So you
can create 2 shared regions and
in these regions we only
have D2 or D3.
So F2 is equal to D2 or D3, and
for the validity or valid
output, whenever we have a
1-hot vector in the input, the
valid must be one.
And all other cases, we
shouldn't look at the output.
The output isn't valid or not valid, so
all are 0.
So as you can see, there is no
way to simplify this function,
But this is a diagonal cell, we
can use the
exclusive or to simplify the Boolean
Function.
Based on this, so this is the
full form. You can just use the
distributive postulate extracted
for this one. The red one.
Extracted inside the parentheses,
becomes exclusive or.
The blue one, here you can
extract and then the inside of
the parenthesis becomes
exclusive or.
And here is the design.
This is the four
by two encoder with an additional output
as the valid.
Ah.
One thing is that
for the encoder.
As you can see in the
truth table.
Let me come back to the truth table
here. Most of the rows
in the truth table are invalid
or not valid. Very few of them
are valid. OK.
So in practice, they said,
let's reuse these invalid
rows or invalid
combination of inputs in the
encoder, but since this is a
invalid 1-hot vector, is it possible
to reuse it for, for instance
for this one?
This is called
Priority Encoder, so basically in
the Priority Encoder, we want to
reuse invalid rules in
the normal encoder.
So how is this possible?
So back to the normal
encoder of four by two.
So the question is.
The first invalid row is this.
So we have
0011. So this is not
a 1-hot vector in the input,
but we could say that,
We can start from the highest
significant bit as long
as what we are doing is correct,
so 001 to up until here,
we see a 1-hot vector.
We don't care about what's
happening in the rest of the
bits because we always assume that
the input is in the right
1-hot vector. So I can say
that 001. So this is a 1-hot
vector. Do not look at what's
happening in the rest of the
bits, and I assume all the other
bits are zero.
And this one happens based on
the noise or etc.
So then I can assume that this
is zero and I can reuse this
row. It has the same
behavior as this.
So I can make it valid.
And produce the binary
address of binary minterms
for this role.
As you can see here, I give the
priority to the D1 as opposed
to the D0, so the priority goes
to the highest significant bit.
So another invalid 1-hot
vector is here.
So again, I start from the
highest significant bit. 01, so up
until here, I see a 1-hot vector.
OK, so I don't look at the rest
of the bits, so I said that here,
up until here, I see zero up
until D2 which is 1. So
right away, I output the binary
number for D2.
So I make this row valid and
then output the minterm 2.
Second, this one,
the next row is also invalid,
but again, if I start from
the high significant bit 01,
I just ignore the rest of the
bits and I assume that all
the other bits are zero and
reuse this 1-hot, this row.
Very similar to this row.
So I make it a valid output 10.
The same is here.
Reuse this row for the minterm
similar to this row.
So the next invalid row is here.
So all these rows are invalid
because they are not
1-hot, but I can say that
starting from the high significant
bit, I see one, so this is 1-
hot. I assume that all the other
bits are zero.
And I reuse these rows as
I like this one.
I make all these rows valid.
And then I output the minterms
as I see the 1-hot for
the D3.
So this way, you design a new
encoder called Priority Encoder.
Whenever you see the input, you
look at the value in the
input from the highest
significant bit. And if it
is correct, you just simply
output the minterms for that
correct 1-hot vector.
So now if you are going
to design the truth tables for
the F2, we have to write the
minterms, which is 4 5 6 7.
And then here 9 10 up until
15. For F1, we have to
write the minterms 2, 3,
and then comes here.
8 and etc. For the V, it's
again the same.
So these are just normal
Boolean functions, so you
write it as a sum of minterms
and put it in the Karnaugh map with
four variables and minimize
it.
One way to show this
table is this.
You could say that for those
at you just simply ignore
looking at, put the X. This
X is a don't care
condition because don't care
condition happens only in the
output functions. This X is
just saying that we don't look at
the value in the input.
As you can see here, these two
rows are the same.
These 3 rows are the same.
And these old rows are similar,
so we can absorb these similar
rows to just show
a dense truth table. This is not
a normal truth table. This is
just a dense version of the truth
table just to show a priority
encoder. The only instance that
remains invalid is this, 0000. It
means that the value is not valid,
V is zero. It means that the
the encoder is turned off and
you shouldn't look at
the output. So you reuse all
the other invalid 1-hot
vectors, or invalid inputs.
The only invalid vector
actually, you just keep it as a
10 off option for the encoder.
And here is the design after
the simplification in the
panel with four variables.
So four inputs, two outputs
plus an additional valid
output. And these are the Boolean
functions after minimization by
the four variable Karnaugh map.
What is the priority? The
application of the encoders?
And the priority encoders? Dr.
Fani. Yes. It's 9:50. OK, just
one more minute and I'm done
just to show you that there's an
application for encoder. We know
the application of the decoder
for selecting the memory
locations. But what is the
application for encoder?
One application is the
positional encoders. For
instance, if you have an
compass, you can create a
digital compass. So you can
assign that whenever the compass
actually shows a direction, you
make it 1 and put it into the
encoder and
provide a encoding mechanism for
the directions. So for instance,
in this device, if you go to
this link, you can read more
about this device.
So this is a compass, so if it
is East it is wired to D2 and
makes it one, and all the other
directions are zero, because at
anytime, only one direction is
enabled. And in the output you
have a binary code or binary
number for that direction.
So this is a way to produce a
binary number for directions.
8 directions, 3 Binary numbers.
And this is the truth table. For instance,
for South, we create 100, the binary
number for 4. For West, you create 6.
Another application is for the
keyboard. For instance, in the normal
keyboard, the standard keyboard
has 104 keys, so we can
say that at anytime, only one key
can be pressed when
all the other keys are dressed,
so one key is 1 and all the
other keys are zero.
Then you can put the 1-hot
vector for the encoder to produce
a binary number for each key.
For instance, if you
press for instance K.
K becomes one and all the other
keys becomes zero and then you
input it into the encoder, and
the encoder produce a binary
number for the key. This way you
encode each key in the keyboard
as a binary number.
So I'm done with the decoder and
encoder and priority encoders,
and the application for that.
So next week I'm going
to introduce multiplexer
and the coders.
Thank you all for your
attention and, uh, I'm
ready for your questions.
Any questions?
...
If there are no questions, have
a great day. I'm going to be in
the office hour if you
have any questions or concern
about the lab assignment, the
lecture assignments, the slides,
etc. And I'm going to check the
midterm marks and we'll release it
in just one hour.
Have a great day all of you.
Thank you Justin.
Thank you Nicholas.
So I stop recording.